Solutions to the Chapter Questions

Chapter 1 Answers

1. The four components required to create a fully dynamic web page are a web server
(such as Apache), a server-side scripting language (PHP), a database (MySQL), and
a client-side scripting language (JavaScript).
2. HTML stands for HyperText Markup Language: it is used to create the web page
itself, including text and markup commands.
3. Like nearly all database engines, MySQL accepts commands in Structured Query
Language (SQL). SQL is the way that every user (including a PHP program) communicates with MySQL.
4. PHP runs on the server, whereas JavaScript runs on the client. PHP can communicate with the database to store and retrieve data, but it can’t alter the user’s web
page quickly and dynamically. JavaScript has the opposite benefits and drawbacks.
5. CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets: styling and layout rules applied to the elements in an HTML document.
6. Some open source technologies are maintained by companies that accept bug reports and fix the errors like any software company. But open source software also
depends on a community, so your bug report may be handled by any user who
understands the code well enough. You may someday fix bugs in an open source
tool yourself.

Chapter 2 Answers

1. WAMP stands for “Windows, Apache, MySQL, and PHP,” while the M in MAMP
stands for Mac instead of Windows and the L in LAMP stands for Linux. They all
refer to a complete solution for hosting dynamic web pages.
2. Both 127.0.0.1 and http://localhost are ways of referring to the local computer.
When a WAMP or MAMP is properly configured, you can type either into a
browser’s address bar to call up the default page on the local server.
3. FTP stands for File Transfer Protocol. An FTP program is used to transfer files back
and forth between a client and a server.
4. It is necessary to FTP files to a remote server in order to update them, which can
substantially increase development time if this action is carried out many times in
a session.
5. Dedicated program editors are smart and can highlight problems in your code
before you even run it.

Chapter 3 Answers

1. The tag used to start PHP interpreting code is <?php ... ?>, which can be shortened
to <? ... ?>.
2. You can use // for a single-line comment or /* ... */ to span multiple lines.
3. All PHP statements must end with a semicolon (;).
4. With the exception of constants, all PHP variables must begin with $.
5. A variable holds a value that can be a string, a number, or other data.
6. $variable = 1 is an assignment statement, whereas $variable == 1 is a comparison
operator. Use $variable = 1 to set the value of $variable. Use $variable == 1 to
find out later in the program whether $variable equals 1. If you mistakenly use
$variable = 1 where you meant to do a comparison, it will do two things you
probably don’t want: set $variable to 1 and return a true value all the time, no
matter what its previous value was.
7. A hyphen is reserved for the subtraction operators. A construct like $currentuser would be harder to interpret if hyphens were also allowed in variable names
and, in any case, would lead programs to be ambiguous.
8. Variable names are case-sensitive. $This_Variable is not the same as $this_vari
able.
9. You cannot use spaces in variable names, as this would confuse the PHP parser.
Instead, try using the _ (underscore).
10. To convert one variable type to another, reference it and PHP will automatically
convert it for you.
11. There is no difference between ++$j and $j++ unless the value of $j is being tested,
assigned to another variable, or passed as a parameter to a function. In such cases,
++$j increments $j before the test or other operation is performed, whereas $j++
performs the operation and then increments $j.
12. Generally, the operators && and and are interchangeable except where precedence
is important, in which case && has a high precedence while and has a low one.
13. You can use multiple lines within quotation marks or the <<< _END ... _END construct to create a multiline echo or assignment.
14. You cannot redefine constants because, by definition, once defined they retain their
value until the program terminates.
15. You can use \' or \" to escape a single or double quote.
16. The echo and print commands are similar, except that print is a PHP function and
takes a single argument while echo is a construct that can take multiple arguments.
17. The purpose of functions is to separate discrete sections of code into their own,
self-contained sections that can be referenced by a single function name.
18. You can make a variable accessible to all parts of a PHP program by declaring it as
global.
19. If you generate data within a function, you can convey the data to the rest of the
program by returning a value or modifying a global variable.
20. When you combine a string with a number, the result is another string.

Chapter 4 Answers

1. In PHP, TRUE represents the value 1 and FALSE represents NULL, which can be thought
of as “nothing” and is output as the empty string.
2. The simplest forms of expressions are literals (such as numbers and strings) and
variables, which simply evaluate to themselves.
3. The difference between unary, binary, and ternary operators is the number of
operands each requires (one, two, and three, respectively).
4. The best way to force your own operator precedence is to place parentheses around
subexpressions to which you wish to give high precedence.
5. Operator associativity refers to the direction of processing (left to right or right to
left).
6. You use the identity operator when you wish to bypass PHP’s automatic operand
type changing (also called type casting).
7. The three conditional statement types are if, switch, and the ? operator.
8. To skip the current iteration of a loop and move on to the next one, use a con
tinue statement.
9. Loops using for statements are more powerful than while loops because they support two additional parameters to control the loop handling.
10. Most conditional expressions in if and while statements are literal (or Boolean)
and therefore trigger execution when they evaluate to TRUE. Numeric expressions
trigger execution when they evaluate to a nonzero value. String expressions trigger
execution when they evaluate to a nonempty string. A NULL value is evaluated as
false and therefore does not trigger execution.

Chapter 5 Answers

1. Using functions avoids the need to copy or rewrite similar code sections many times
over by combining sets of statements together so that they can be called by a simple
name.
2. By default, a function can return a single value. But by utilizing arrays, references,
and global variables, any number of values can be returned.
3. When you reference a variable by name, such as by assigning its value to another
variable or by passing its value to a function, its value is copied. The original does
not change when the copy is changed. But if you reference a variable, only a pointer
(or reference) to its value is used, so that a single value is referenced by more than
one name. Changing the value of the reference will change the original as well.
4. Scope refers to which parts of a program can access a variable. For example, a
variable of global scope can be accessed by all parts of a PHP program.
5. To incorporate one file within another, you can use the include or require directives, or their safer variants, include_once and require_once.
6. A function is a set of statements referenced by a name that can receive and return
values. An object may contain zero, one, or many functions (which are then called
methods) as well as variables (which are called properties), all combined in a single
unit.
7. To create a new object in PHP, use the new keyword like this: $object = new Class.
8. To create a subclass, use the extends keyword with syntax such as this: class Sub
class extends Parentclass.
9. To call a piece of initializing code when an object is created, create a constructor
method called __construct within the class and place your code there.
10. Explicitly declaring properties within a class is unnecessary, as they will be implicitly declared upon first use. However, it is considered good practice as it helps
with code readability and debugging, and is especially useful to other people who
may have to maintain your code.

Chapter 6 Answers

1. A numeric array can be indexed numerically using numbers or numeric variables.
An associative array uses alphanumeric identifiers to index elements.
2. The main benefit of the array keyword is that it enables you to assign several values
at a time to an array without repeating the array name.
3. Both the each function and the foreach...as loop construct return elements from
an array; both start at the beginning and increment a pointer to make sure the next
element is returned each time, and both return FALSE when the end of the array is
reached. The difference is that the each function returns just a single element, so
it is usually wrapped in a loop. The foreach...as construct is already a loop, executing repeatedly until the array is exhausted or you explicitly break out of the loop.
4. To create a multidimensional array, you need to assign additional arrays to elements of the main array.
5. You can use the count function to count the number of elements in an array.
6. The purpose of the explode function is to extract sections from a string that are
separated by an identifier, such as extracting words separated by spaces within a
sentence.
7. To reset PHP’s internal pointer into an array back to the first element, call the
reset function.

Chapter 7 Answers

1. The conversion specifier you would use to display a floating-point number is %f.
2. To take the input string “Happy Birthday” and output the string “**Happy”, you
could use a printf statement such as printf("%'*7.5s", "Happy Birthday");.
3. To send the output from printf to a variable instead of to a browser, you would
use sprintf instead.
4. To create a Unix timestamp for 7:11 AM on May 2, 2016, you could use the command $timestamp = mktime(7, 11, 0, 5, 2, 2016);.
5. You would use the w+ file access mode with fopen to open a file in write and read
mode, with the file truncated and the file pointer at the start.
6. The PHP command for deleting the file file.txt is unlink('file.txt');.
7. The PHP function file_get_contents is used to read in an entire file in one go. It
will also read a file from across the Internet if provided with a URL.
8. The PHP associative array $_FILES contains the details about uploaded files.
9. The PHP exec function enables the running of system commands.
10. In XHTML 1.0, the tag <input type=file name=file size=10> should be replaced
with the following syntax: <input type="file" name="file" size="10" />. All parameters must be quoted, and tags without closing tags must be self-closed
using />.

Chapter 8 Answers

1. The semicolon is used by MySQL to separate or end commands. If you forget to
enter it, MySQL will issue a prompt and wait for you to enter it.
2. To see the available databases, type SHOW databases;. To see tables within a database that you are using, type SHOW tables;. (These commands are case-insensitive.)
3. To create this new user, use the GRANT command like this:
GRANT PRIVILEGES ON newdatabase.* TO 'newuser' IDENTIFIED BY 'newpassword';
4. To view the structure of a table, type DESCRIBE tablename;.
5. The purpose of a MySQL index is to substantially decrease database access times
by maintaining indexes of one or more key columns, which can then be quickly
searched to locate rows within a table.
6. A FULLTEXT index enables natural-language queries to find keywords, wherever they
are in the FULLTEXT column(s), in much the same way as using a search engine.
7. A stopword is a word that is so common that it is considered not worth including
in a FULLTEXT index or using in searches. However, it does participate in a search
when it is part of a larger string bounded by double quotes.
8. SELECT DISTINCT essentially affects only the display, choosing a single row and
eliminating all the duplicates. GROUP BY does not eliminate rows, but combines all
the rows that have the same value in the column. Therefore, GROUP BY is useful for
performing operations such as COUNT on groups of rows. SELECT DISTINCT is not
useful for that purpose.
9. To return only those rows containing the word Langhorne somewhere in the column author of the table classics, use a command such as:
SELECT * FROM classics WHERE author LIKE "%Langhorne%";
10. When joining two tables together, they must share at least one common column
such as an ID number or, as in the case of the classics and customers tables, the
isbn column.

Chapter 9 Answers

1. The term relationship refers to the connection between two pieces of data that have
some association, such as a book and its author, or a book and the customer who
bought the book. A relational database such as MySQL specializes in storing and
retrieving such relations.
2. The process of removing duplicate data and optimizing tables is called
normalization.
3. The three rules of First Normal Form are: (1) there should be no repeating columns
containing the same kind of data, (2) all columns should contain a single value,
and (3) there should be a primary key to uniquely identify each row.
4. To satisfy Second Normal Form, columns whose data repeats across multiple rows
should be removed to their own tables.
5. In a one-to-many relationship, the primary key from the table on the “one” side
must be added as a separate column (a foreign key) to the table on the “many” side.
6. To create a database with a many-to-many relationship, you create an intermediary
table containing keys from two other tables. The other tables can then reference
each other via the third.
7. To initiate a MySQL transaction, use either the BEGIN or the START TRANSACTION
command. To terminate a transaction and cancel all actions, issue a ROLLBACK command. To terminate a transaction and commit all actions, issue a COMMIT command.
8. To examine how a query will work in detail, you can use the EXPLAIN command.
9. To back up the database publications to a file called publications.sql, you would
use a command such as:
mysqldump -u user -ppassword publications > publications.sql

Chapter 10 Answers

1. The standard MySQL function used for connecting to a MySQL database is
mysql_connect.
2. The mysql_result function is not optimal when more than one cell is being requested, because it fetches only a single cell from a database and therefore has to
be called multiple times, whereas mysql_fetch_row will fetch an entire row.
3. The POST form method is generally better than GET because the fields are posted
directly, rather than appending them to the URL. This has several advantages,
particularly in removing the possibility to enter spoof data at the browser’s address
bar. (It is not a complete defense against spoofing, however.)
4. To determine the last-entered value of an AUTO_INCREMENT column, use the
mysql_insert_id function.
5. The PHP function that escapes a string, making it suitable for use with MySQL, is
mysql_real_escape_string.
6. Cross-site scripting injection attacks can be prevented using the htmlentities
function.

Chapter 11 Answers

1. The associative arrays used to pass submitted form data to PHP are $_GET for the
GET method and $_POST for the POST method.
2. The register_globals setting was the default in versions of PHP prior to 4.2.0. It
was not a good idea because it automatically assigned submitted form field data
to PHP variables, thus opening up a security hole for potential hackers, who could
attempt to break into PHP code by initializing variables to values of their choice.
3. The difference between a text box and a text area is that although they both accept
text for form input, a text box is a single line, whereas a text area can be multiple
lines and includes word wrapping.
4. To offer three mutually exclusive choices in a web form, you should use radio
buttons, because checkboxes allow multiple selections.
5. You can submit a group of selections from a web form using a single field name by
using an array name with square brackets, such as choices[], instead of a regular
field name. Each value is then placed into the array, whose length will be the number of elements submitted.
6. To submit a form field without the user seeing it, place it in a hidden field using
the parameter type="hidden".
7. You can encapsulate a form element and supporting text or graphics, making the
entire unit selectable with a mouse-click, by using the <label> and </label> tags.
8. To convert HTML into a format that can be displayed but will not be interpreted
as HTML by a browser, use the PHP htmlentities function.

Chapter 12 Answers

1. Cookies should be transferred before a web page’s HTML because they are sent as
part of the headers.
2. To store a cookie on a web browser, use the set_cookie function.
3. To destroy a cookie, reissue it with set_cookie but set its expiration date to sometime in the past.
4. Using HTTP authentication, both the username and password are stored in
$_SERVER['PHP_AUTH_USER'] and $_SERVER['PHP_AUTH_PW'].
5. The md5 function is a powerful security measure because it is a one-way function
that converts a string to a 32-character hexadecimal number that cannot be converted back, and is therefore almost uncrackable.
6. When a string is salted, extra characters (known only by the programmer) are
added to it before md5 conversion. This makes it nearly impossible for a brute-force
dictionary attack to succeed.
7. A PHP session is a group of variables unique to the current user.
8. To initiate a PHP session, use the session_start function.
9. Session hijacking is where a hacker somehow discovers an existing session ID and
attempts to take it over.
10. Session fixation is the attempt to force your own session ID onto a server rather
than letting it create its own.

Chapter 13 Answers

1. To enclose JavaScript code, you use <script> and </script> tags.
2. By default, JavaScript code will output to the part of the document in which it
resides. If it’s in the head it will output to the head; if the body, then the body.
3. You can include JavaScript code from other sources in your documents by either
copying and pasting them or, more commonly, including them as part of a <script
src='filename.js'> tag.
4. The equivalent of the echo and print commands used in PHP is the JavaScript
document.write function (or method).
5. To create a comment in JavaScript, preface it with // for a single-line comment or
surround it with /* and */ for a multiline comment.
6. The JavaScript string concatenation operator is the + symbol.
7. Within a JavaScript function, you can define a variable that has local scope by
preceding it with the var keyword upon first assignment.
8. To display the URL assigned to the link with an ID of thislink in all main browsers,
you can use the two following commands:
document.write(document.getElementById('thislink').href)
document.write(thislink.href)
9. The commands to change to the previous page in the browser’s history array are:
history.back()
history.go(-1)
10. To replace the current document with the main page at the oreilly.com website,
you could use the following command:
document.location.href = 'http://oreilly.com'

Chapter 14 Answers

1. The most noticeable difference between Boolean values in PHP and JavaScript is
that PHP recognizes the keywords TRUE, true, FALSE, and false, whereas only
true and false are supported in JavaScript. Additionally, in PHP, TRUE has a value
of 1 and FALSE is NULL; in JavaScript they are represented by true and false, which
can be returned as string values.
2. The difference between unary, binary, and ternary operators is the number of
operands each requires (one, two, and three, respectively).
3. The best way to force your own operator precedence is to surround the parts of an
expression to be evaluated first with parentheses.
4. You use the identity operator when you wish to bypass JavaScript’s automatic
operand type changing.
5. The simplest forms of expressions are literals (such as numbers and strings) and
variables, which simply evaluate to themselves.
6. The three conditional statement types are if, switch, and the ? operator.
7. Most conditional expressions in if and while statements are literal or Boolean and
therefore trigger execution when they evaluate to TRUE. Numeric expressions trigger
execution when they evaluate to a nonzero value. String expressions trigger execution when they evaluate to a nonempty string. A NULL value is evaluated as false
and therefore does not trigger execution.
8. Loops using for statements are more powerful than while loops because they support two additional parameters to control loop handling.
9. The with statement takes an object as its parameter. Using it, you specify an object
once; then, for each statement within the with block, that object is assumed.
10. To handle errors gracefully use the try function, which will pass any error encountered to a matching catch function, where you can process the error or provide
alternate code. You can also attach code to the onerror event.

Chapter 15 Answers

1. JavaScript function and variable names are case-sensitive. The variables Count,
count, and COUNT are all different.
2. To write a function that accepts and processes an unlimited number of parameters,
access the parameters through the arguments array, which is a member of all
functions.
3. One way to return multiple values from a function is to place them all inside an
array and return the array.
4. When defining a class, use the this keyword to refer to the current object.
5. The methods of a class do not have to be defined within a class definition. If a
method is defined outside the constructor, the method name must be assigned to
the this object within the class definition.
6. New objects are created using the new keyword.
7. A property or method can be made available to all objects in a class without replicating the property or method within the object by using the prototype keyword
to create a single instance, which is then passed by reference to all the objects in
the class.
8. To create a multidimensional array, place subarrays inside the main array.
9. The syntax you would use to create an associative array is key : value, within curly
braces, as in the following:
assocarray = {"forename" : "Paul", "surname" : "McCartney", "group" : "Beatles"}
10. A statement to sort an array of numbers into descending numerical order would
look like this:
numbers.sort(function(a,b){return b - a})

Chapter 16 Answers

1. You can send a form for validation prior to submitting it by adding the JavaScript
onSubmit method to the <form> tag. Make sure that your function returns true if
the form is to be submitted and false otherwise.
2. To match a string against a regular expression in JavaScript, use the test method.
3. Regular expressions to match characters not in a word could be any of /[^\w]/, /
[\W]/, /[^a-zA-Z0-9_]/, and so on.
4. A regular expression to match either of the words “fox” or “fix” could be /f[oi]x/.
5. A regular expression to match any single word followed by any nonword character
could be /\w+\W/g.
6. A JavaScript function using regular expressions to test whether the word “fox”
exists in the string “The quick brown fox” could be:
document.write(/fox/.test("The quick brown fox"))
7. A PHP function using a regular expression to replace all occurrences of the word
“the” in “The cow jumps over the moon” with the word “my” could be:
$s=preg_replace("/the/i", "my", "The cow jumps over the moon");
8. The HTML keyword used to precomplete form fields with a value is the value
keyword, which is placed within an <input> tag and takes the form value="value".

Chapter 17 Answers

1. It’s necessary to write a function for creating new XMLHTTPRequest objects because
Microsoft browsers use two different methods of creating them, while all other
major browsers use a third. By writing a function to test the browser in use, you
can ensure that your code will work on all major browsers.
2. The purpose of the try...catch construct is to set an error trap for the code inside
the try statement. If the code causes an error, the catch section will be executed
instead of a general error being issued.
3. An XMLHTTPRequest object has six properties and six methods (see Tables 18-1 and
18-2).
4. You can tell that an Ajax call has completed when the readyState property of an
object has a value of 4.
5. When an Ajax call successfully completes, the object’s status property will have a
value of 200.
6. The responseText property of an XMLHTTPRequest object contains the value returned
by a successful Ajax call.
7. The responseXML property of an XMLHTTPRequest object contains a DOM tree created
from the XML returned by a successful Ajax call.
8. To specify a callback function to handle Ajax responses, assign the function name
to the XMLHTTPRequest object’s onreadystatechange property. You can also use an
unnamed, inline function.
9. To initiate an Ajax request, an XMLHTTPRequest object’s send method is called.
10. The main differences between Ajax GET and POST requests are that GET requests
append the data to the URL, while POST requests instead pass the data as a parameter of the send method and require the correct form headers to be sent first.

Chapter 18 Answers

1. To import one style sheet into another you use the @import directive, like this:
@import url('styles.css');.
2. To import a stylesheet into a document, you can use the HTML <link /> tag, like
this: <link rel='stylesheet' type='text/css' href='styles.css' />.
3. To directly embed a style into an element, use the style attribute, like this: <div
style='color:blue;'>.
4. The difference between a CSS ID and a CSS class is that an ID is applied to only a
single element, whereas a class can be applied to many elements.
5. In a CSS declaration, ID names are prefixed with a # character and class names
with a . character, as in #myid and .myclass.
6. In CSS the semicolon is used as a separator between declarations.
7. To add a comment to a stylesheet, you enclose it between /* and */ opening and
closing comment markers.
8. In CSS you can match any element using the * universal selector.
9. To select a group of different elements and/or element types in CSS, you place a
comma between each element, ID, class, etc.
10. To make one CSS declaration of a pair with equal precedence have greater precedence over the other one, you append the !important declaration to it, like this: p
{ color:#ff0000 !important; }.

Chapter 19 Answers

1. The CSS3 operators ^, $, and * respectively match the start, end, or any portion of
a string.
2. The property you use to specify the size of a background image is backgroundsize, like this: background-size:800px 600px;.
3. You can specify the radius of a border using the border-radius property, like this:
border-radius:20px;.
4. To flow text over multiple columns, you use the column-count, column-gap, and
column-rule properties or their browser-specific variants, like this: column-count:
3; column-gap:1em; column-rule:1px solid black;.
5. The four functions with which you can specify CSS colors are hsl, hsla, rgb, and
rgba. For example: color:rgba(0%,60%,40%,0.4);.
6. To create a gray text shadow under some text, offset diagonally to the bottom right
by 5 pixels, with a blurring of 3 pixels, you would use this declaration: text-shadow:
5px 5px 3px #888;.
7. You can indicate with an ellipsis that text is truncated using this declaration: textoverflow:ellipsis;.
8. To include a Google web font in a web page, first select it from http://google.com/
webfonts. Then, assuming, for example, you chose “Lobster,” you include it in a
<link> tag, like this: <link href='http://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Lob
ster' />. You must also refer to the font in a CSS declaration such as this: h1
{ font-family:'Lobster', arial, serif; }.
9. The CSS declaration you would use to rotate an object by 90 degrees is trans
form:rotate(90deg);.
10. To set up a transition on an object so that when any of its properties are changed
the change will transition immediately in a linear fashion over the course of half a
second, you would use this declaration: transition:all .5s linear;.

Chapter 20 Answers

1. The O function returns an object by its ID, the S function returns the style property
of an object, and the C function returns an array of all objects that access a given
class.
2. You can modify a CSS attribute of an object using the setAttribute function, like
this: myobject.setAttribute('font-size', '16pt'). You can also (usually) modify
an attribute directly, using slightly modified property names where required, like
this: myobject.fontSize = '16pt'. (Recall that JavaScript reserves the hyphen character
for use as a mathematical operator, so when accessing a hyphenated CSSproperty you must
omit the hyphen and set the character that followed it to uppercase.)
3. The properties that provide the width and height available in a browser window
are window.innerHeight and window.innerWidth.
4. To make something happen when the mouse pointer passes over and out of an
object, attach the code that does this to the onmouseover and onmouseout events.
5. To create a new element, implement code such as elem = document.createEle
ment('span'), and to add the new element to the DOM, use code such as docu
ment.body.appendChild(elem).
6. To make an element invisible, set its visibility property to 'hidden' (use 'visi
ble' to restore it again). To collapse an element’s dimensions to zero, set its dis
play property to 'none' (use 'block' to restore it).
7. To set a single event at a future time, call the setTimeout function, passing it the
code or function name to execute and the time delay in milliseconds.
8. To set up repeating events at regular intervals, use the setInterval function, passing
it the code or function name to execute and the time delay between repeats, in milliseconds.
9. To release an element from its location in a web page and enable it to be moved
around, set its position property to 'relative', 'absolute', or 'fixed'. To restore
it to its original place, set the property to 'static'.
10. To achieve an animation rate of 50 frames per second, you should set a delay
between interrupts of 20 milliseconds. To calculate this value, divide 1,000
milliseconds by the desired frame rate.
